docs/build/tutorial.rst, before:

PG-SUI Tutorial
===============

Overview
--------

**PG-SUI** (Population Genomic Supervised & Unsupervised Imputation) performs missing-data imputation on SNP genotype matrices using **Deterministic**, **Supervised**, and **Unsupervised** model families. It integrates tightly with `SNPio <https://github.com/btmartin721/SNPio>`__ for reading, filtering, and writing genotype datasets, and emphasizes **unsupervised deep learning** approaches tuned for class imbalance and diploid (3-class) genotype representations. Unsupervised neural approaches (e.g., autoencoding families) are inspired by prior work on representation learning and generative modeling (Hinton & Salakhutdinov, 2006; Kingma & Welling, 2013).

PG-SUI supports both a command-line interface (CLI) for scripted workflows and a Python API for programmatic control.

Unsupervised Models
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

- **ImputeAutoencoder**: Standard autoencoder architecture for genotype reconstruction (Hinton & Salakhutdinov, 2006).
- **ImputeVAE**: Variational Autoencoder with KL regularization (Kingma & Welling, 2013).
- These models learn structure from observed entries and then infer true missing genotypes by training on simulated missingness.

.. image:: ../../img/autoencoder_vae_model_diagrams.png
    :alt: Side-by-side comparison of two neural network architectures for genomic imputation. Left diagram with blue boxes shows ImputeAutoencoder workflow: input genotypes with missing data encoded as 0=REF, 1=HET, 2=ALT, -9 or -1=Missing flows through gamma Schedule, Encoder Network, Latent Space, Decoder Network, Reconstruction Loss, to produce Imputed Genotype Output. Right diagram with orange boxes shows ImputeVAE architecture: genotype input flows through Encoder Network to Mean and Log Variance outputs, then Sampling with Reparameterization, KL-beta Schedule, KL Divergence Loss, Decoder Network, Reconstruction Loss, producing Imputed Genotype Output. Both models output refilled missing values. The comparison illustrates how the autoencoder differs from VAE through additional scheduled parameters and loss components in the variational model.
    :align: center

Supervised Models
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

- **ImputeRandomForest**: IterativeImputer + RandomForestClassifier.
- **ImputeHistGradientBoosting**: IterativeImputer + HistGradientBoostingClassifier.
- These models learn from observed genotypes to predict missing states and can be tuned with the same Optuna-driven machinery as the unsupervised models. They provide strong, interpretable comparisons alongside the deep models.

What's new
----------

- **Dataclass-based configuration** at the API level. Each imputer is configured with a typed ``*Config`` dataclass (e.g., ``VAEConfig``) instead of ad-hoc kwargs.
- **Presets** (``fast``, ``balanced``, ``thorough``) available via ``*.from_preset("...")`` and the CLI ``--preset`` flag.
- **YAML configuration files** (``--config path.yaml``) to persist experiments; YAML merges with presets and can be partially specified.
- **Refactored CLI** with a clear precedence model:

  ``code defaults  <  preset (--preset)  <  YAML (--config)  <  explicit CLI flags  <  --set k=v``,

  where ``--set`` applies deep dot-path overrides (e.g., ``--set model.latent_dim=16``).

- **Best-parameter loading** via ``--load-best-params``

  - Loads prior best parameters per selected model from the previous run's output directory.
  - **Forces tuning OFF** (even if YAML/CLI/``--set`` attempts to re-enable tuning).

How to run PG-SUI
-----------------

- **Command line** — run ``pg-sui`` directly for scripted, reproducible workflows. This tutorial includes a copy/paste CLI quickstart, the precedence model, and best-parameter loading.
- **Python API** — instantiate an imputer with ``genotype_data`` and a typed config, then call ``fit()`` followed by ``transform()``.

Model Families
--------------

- **Deterministic (Baselines)**

  - ``ImputeMostFrequent``: per-locus mode imputation (global or population-aware). The population-aware variant uses ``popmap`` groups to compute modes per subpopulation.
  - ``ImputeRefAllele``: fills missing genotypes with the REF (0) state.

- **Unsupervised (Deep Learning)**

  - ``ImputeAutoencoder``: Standard autoencoder reconstruction (Hinton & Salakhutdinov, 2006).
  - ``ImputeVAE``: Variational Autoencoder with KL regularization (Kingma & Welling, 2013).

- **Supervised (Tree-based)**

  - ``ImputeRandomForest``: IterativeImputer + RandomForestClassifier.
  - ``ImputeHistGradientBoosting``: IterativeImputer + HistGradientBoostingClassifier.

.. warning::

    Supervised models can take significantly longer to run than unsupervised models due to the computationally expensive, iterative nature of the scikit-learn `IterativeImputer <https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.impute.IterativeImputer.html#sklearn.impute.IterativeImputer>`__. Per the scikit-learn documentation, "the computational cost of each iteration is :math:`O(k\,n\,p^3\min(n, p))`, where ``k=max_iter``, ``n`` is the number of samples, and ``p`` is the number of features. Setting ``n_nearest_features << n_features``, ``skip_complete=True`` or increasing ``tol`` can help to reduce its computational cost."

.. note::

   **Fit/ transform:** ``fit()`` and ``transform()`` do **not** accept genotype inputs. Each model is constructed with a `SNPio <https://snpio.readthedocs.io/en/latest/>`__ ``GenotypeData`` object and a typed ``*Config``. Then call ``fit()`` and ``transform()`` in sequence.

Installation
------------

PG-SUI can be installed via pip, Anaconda, or Docker. See the instructions below and the :doc:`install` page for more details. Currently, PG-SUI requires Python 3.11 or 3.12, and depends on `SNPio <https://snpio.readthedocs.io/en/latest/>`__ for genotype I/O and preprocessing. Windows is not officially supported at this time, but should work within `WSL2 (Windows Subsystem for Linux 2) <https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/wsl/install>`__ or a compatible Docker environment.

Pip installation
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Install PG-SUI with pip (ideally in a fresh virtual environment):

.. code-block:: bash

    pip install pg-sui

Anaconda installation
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

An Anaconda package is also available on `Anaconda Cloud <https://anaconda.org/btmartin721/pg-sui>`__.

.. code-block:: bash

    conda create -n pgsui-env python=3.12
    conda activate pgsui-env
    conda install -c btmartin721 pg-sui

Docker installation
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Finally, a Docker image is available on `Docker Hub <https://hub.docker.com/r/btmartin721/pg-sui>`__:

.. code-block:: bash

    docker pull btmartin721/pg-sui:latest
    docker run -it --rm btmartin721/pg-sui:latest pg-sui --help

See :doc:`install` for more detail. PG-SUI expects genotype I/O via `SNPio <https://snpio.readthedocs.io/en/latest/>`__.

Data Input, Encodings, and Conventions
--------------------------------------

PG-SUI uses `SNPio's <https://snpio.readthedocs.io/en/latest/>`__  ``GenotypeData`` object.

- **Inputs**: VCF, PHYLIP, STRUCTURE, or GENEPOP, plus an optional ``popmap`` (population map) file. See `SNPio's documentation <https://snpio.readthedocs.io/en/latest/>`__ for details on supported formats and options.
- **Internal ML encoding**: diploids use a 3-class genotype representation (REF/HET/ALT), corresponding to integer codes 0/1/2. Haploids are treated as two classes by folding ALT into a binary code (0/1 for training, mapped back to 0/2 when decoded). Missing genotypes are encoded as ``-1`` during model fitting and imputation. REF alleles correspond to the most frequent homozygous genotype at each site (or consensus reference allele if reference genome-aligned VCF input is used). ALT corresponds to homozygous alternate genotypes; HET represents heterozygous genotypes.
- **Evaluation labels**: ``["REF", "HET", "ALT"]`` for diploids; haploids collapse to two classes (``["REF", "ALT"]``).
- **Output**: ``transform()`` returns a NumPy array of genotypes decoded from the REF/ HET/ ALT genotypes as IUPAC single-character strings ("A", "T", "G", "C", "R", "Y", "S", "W", "K", "M"). The imputed dataset is written to disk via SNPio in the same format as the input.

CLI Quickstart (copy/paste)
---------------------------

#. Prepare input files: a VCF (e.g., ``data.vcf.gz``) and optional population map (e.g., ``pops.popmap``).
#. Run a preset with two deep models (edit paths/ models as needed):

   .. code-block:: bash

      pg-sui \
        --input pgsui/example_data/vcf_files/phylogen_subset14K.vcf.gz \
        --popmap pgsui/example_data/popmaps/test.popmap \
        --models ImputeAutoencoder ImputeVAE \
        --preset balanced \
        --prefix demo \
        --sim-strategy random_weighted_inv \
        --sim-prop 0.30 \
        --tune \
        --tune-n-trials 100 \
        --n-jobs 4

#. Optional: add a YAML config (``--config vae_balanced.yaml``) or apply tweaks with ``--set key=value`` command-line flags.
#. Outputs and plots are written under ``<prefix>_output/``. The CLI prints paths as it runs.

.. note::

   The CLI supports ``--input`` as the primary input flag. ``--vcf`` is retained for backward compatibility but is deprecated in favor of ``--input``.

STRUCTURE inputs
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

STRUCTURE files include a few extra command-line flags compared to the other file formats and can be passed with ``--format structure`` (or inferred from the file extension). Optional flags mirror SNPio's ``StructureReader``:

- ``--structure-has-popids`` (second column contains population IDs)
- ``--structure-has-marker-names`` (first row contains marker names)
- ``--structure-allele-start-col <int>`` (zero-based allele start column)
- ``--structure-allele-encoding '{"1":"A","2":"C","3":"G","4":"T","-9":"N"}'``

Example:

.. code-block:: bash

    pg-sui \
      --input data.str \
      --format structure \
      --structure-has-popids \
      --structure-allele-start-col 2 \
      --structure-allele-encoding '{"1":"A","2":"C","3":"G","4":"T","-9":"N"}'


Loading best parameters from a previous run
-------------------------------------------

If you previously tuned (or otherwise produced a best-parameters file), you can load those parameters into the current run's configs using:

- ``--load-best-params`` (enables loading)
- optional ``--best-params-prefix <prior_prefix>`` (points at a previous run's ``<prior_prefix>_output`` directory)

When ``--load-best-params`` is enabled, PG-SUI **forces tuning OFF** for the affected models, regardless of YAML, CLI flags, ``--tune``, or ``--set tune.*``.

Best-parameter search locations
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

For each selected model, the CLI searches under the prior run's output directory and will accept either tuned or non-tuned best-parameters files:

- Tuned runs (`Optuna <https://optuna.org/>`__):

  - ``<prefix>_output/<Family>/optimize/<model>/parameters/best_tuned_parameters.json``

- Non-tuned / finalized best params:

  - ``<prefix>_output/<Family>/parameters/<model>/best_parameters.json``

where ``<Family>`` is typically ``Unsupervised`` or ``Deterministic`` and ``<model>`` may match either the canonical model name or its lower-case variant.

Example usage
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. code-block:: bash

    # Re-run with best parameters from an earlier tuning prefix,
    # with tuning forcibly disabled
    pg-sui \
      --input data.vcf.gz \
      --popmap pops.popmap \
      --models ImputeAutoencoder ImputeVAE \
      --prefix rerun_bestparams \
      --load-best-params \
      --best-params-prefix tuned_run_01 \
      --preset balanced \
      --sim-strategy random_weighted_inv \
      --sim-prop 0.30

.. note::

   If you supply ``--tune`` (or ``--set tune.enabled=True``) alongside ``--load-best-params``, PG-SUI will log warnings and proceed with tuning disabled. The best-params layer is intended to reproduce prior tuned settings without re-optimizing.

Simulated missingness and evaluation
------------------------------------

PG-SUI evaluates models by masking observed genotypes and scoring only
those held-out entries. See :doc:`simulate` for the full strategy
definitions, tree-based options, and evaluation workflow details.

Quick Start (End-to-End VAE Example)
------------------------------------

.. code-block:: python

    from snpio import VCFReader
    from pgsui import VAEConfig, ImputeVAE

    gd = VCFReader(
        filename="pgsui/example_data/vcf_files/phylogen_subset14K.vcf.gz",
        popmapfile="pgsui/example_data/popmaps/test.popmap",
        prefix="pgsui_demo",
        force_popmap=True,
        plot_format="pdf",
    )

    cfg = VAEConfig.from_preset("balanced")
    cfg.io.prefix = "pgsui_demo"
    cfg.model.latent_dim = 16
    cfg.tune.enabled = True
    cfg.tune.n_trials = 100
    cfg.tune.metric = "pr_macro"
    cfg.plot.show = False

    model = ImputeVAE(genotype_data=gd, config=cfg)
    model.fit()
    X_imputed = model.transform()

Using Presets Programmatically
------------------------------

.. code-block:: python

    from pgsui import VAEConfig, ImputeVAE

    vae_cfg = VAEConfig.from_preset("fast")

    vae_cfg.model.num_hidden_layers = 3
    vae_cfg.io.prefix = "vae_run1"

    vae = ImputeVAE(genotype_data=gd, config=vae_cfg)
    vae.fit()
    X_vae = vae.transform()

YAML Configuration Files
------------------------

Example YAML - ``vae_balanced.yaml``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. code-block:: yaml

    io:
      prefix: "vae_demo"
      seed: 42

    model:
      latent_dim: 16
      num_hidden_layers: 3
      layer_scaling_factor: 4.0
      dropout_rate: 0.20
      activation: "relu"

    train:
      learning_rate: 0.0008
      early_stop_gen: 15
      min_epochs: 50
      max_epochs: 1000
      validation_split: 0.20
      device: "cpu"

    tune:
      enabled: true
      metric: "pr_macro"
      n_trials: 100
      patience: 10

    sim:
      simulate_missing: true
      sim_strategy: "random_weighted_inv"
      sim_prop: 0.30

    plot:
      fmt: "pdf"
      show: false
      dpi: 300

Loading YAML with Python
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. code-block:: python

    from pgsui import VAEConfig, ImputeVAE
    from pgsui.data_processing.config import load_yaml_to_dataclass

    cfg = load_yaml_to_dataclass("vae_balanced.yaml", VAEConfig)
    model = ImputeVAE(genotype_data=gd, config=cfg)
    model.fit()
    X_vae = model.transform()

Command-Line Interface (CLI)
----------------------------

Precedence model (highest last)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

``code defaults  <  preset (--preset)  <  YAML (--config)  <  explicit CLI flags  <  --set k=v``

- ``--preset`` selects a baseline preset.
- ``--config`` applies YAML on top of the preset.
- Explicit CLI flags (if provided) override YAML.
- ``--set`` applies deep dot-path overrides for final tweaks.

.. note::

   If ``--load-best-params`` is used, best-params are applied *before* CLI flags and ``--set``, but tuning is forced OFF at the end regardless of any later overrides.

Typical CLI usage
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. code-block:: bash

    # Minimal run with a preset
    pg-sui \
      --input data.vcf.gz \
      --popmap pops.popmap \
      --models ImputeAutoencoder ImputeVAE \
      --preset balanced \
      --prefix demo

    # YAML + quick overrides
    pg-sui \
      --input data.vcf.gz \
      --popmap pops.popmap \
      --models ImputeVAE \
      --preset thorough \
      --config vae_balanced.yaml \
      --set io.prefix=vae_vs_ae \
      --set model.latent_dim=32

Minimal API Reference
---------------------

.. code-block:: python

    model = SomeImputer(genotype_data=gd, config=SomeConfig.from_preset("balanced"))
    model.fit()
    X_imputed = model.transform()

References
----------

Chawla, N. V., Bowyer, K. W., Hall, L. O., & Kegelmeyer, W. P. (2002). SMOTE: Synthetic Minority Over-sampling Technique. *Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research*, 16, 321-357.

Hinton, G. E., & Salakhutdinov, R. (2006). Reducing the dimensionality of data with neural networks. *Science*, 313(5786), 504-507.

Kingma, D. P., & Welling, M. (2013). Auto-Encoding Variational Bayes. *arXiv preprint* arXiv:1312.6114.

Commit message:

feat: update tutorial documentation to include NLPCA and UBP models in unsupervised section

docs/build/tutorial.rst, after:

PG-SUI Tutorial
===============

Overview
--------

**PG-SUI** (Population Genomic Supervised & Unsupervised Imputation) performs missing-data imputation on SNP genotype matrices using **Deterministic**, **Supervised**, and **Unsupervised** model families. It integrates tightly with `SNPio <https://github.com/btmartin721/SNPio>`__ for reading, filtering, and writing genotype datasets, and emphasizes **unsupervised deep learning** approaches tuned for class imbalance and diploid (3-class) genotype representations. Unsupervised neural approaches (e.g., autoencoding families) are inspired by prior work on representation learning and generative modeling (Hinton & Salakhutdinov, 2006; Kingma & Welling, 2013).

PG-SUI supports both a command-line interface (CLI) for scripted workflows and a Python API for programmatic control.

Unsupervised Models
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

- **ImputeAutoencoder**: Standard autoencoder architecture for genotype reconstruction (Hinton & Salakhutdinov, 2006).
- **ImputeVAE**: Variational Autoencoder with KL regularization (Kingma & Welling, 2013).
- **ImputeNLPCA**: Decoder-only non-linear PCA with per-sample latent embeddings and projection-based refinement.
- **ImputeUBP**: Unsupervised Backpropagation with phased training and latent projection (Gashler et al., 2014).
- These models learn structure from observed entries and then infer true missing genotypes by training on simulated missingness.

.. image:: ../../img/autoencoder_vae_model_diagrams.png
    :alt: Side-by-side comparison of two neural network architectures for genomic imputation. Left diagram with blue boxes shows ImputeAutoencoder workflow: input genotypes with missing data encoded as 0=REF, 1=HET, 2=ALT, -9 or -1=Missing flows through gamma Schedule, Encoder Network, Latent Space, Decoder Network, Reconstruction Loss, to produce Imputed Genotype Output. Right diagram with orange boxes shows ImputeVAE architecture: genotype input flows through Encoder Network to Mean and Log Variance outputs, then Sampling with Reparameterization, KL-beta Schedule, KL Divergence Loss, Decoder Network, Reconstruction Loss, producing Imputed Genotype Output. Both models output refilled missing values. The comparison illustrates how the autoencoder differs from VAE through additional scheduled parameters and loss components in the variational model.
    :align: center

Supervised Models
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

- **ImputeRandomForest**: IterativeImputer + RandomForestClassifier.
- **ImputeHistGradientBoosting**: IterativeImputer + HistGradientBoostingClassifier.
- These models learn from observed genotypes to predict missing states and can be tuned with the same Optuna-driven machinery as the unsupervised models. They provide strong, interpretable comparisons alongside the deep models.

What's new
----------

- **Dataclass-based configuration** at the API level. Each imputer is configured with a typed ``*Config`` dataclass (e.g., ``VAEConfig``) instead of ad-hoc kwargs.
- **Presets** (``fast``, ``balanced``, ``thorough``) available via ``*.from_preset("...")`` and the CLI ``--preset`` flag.
- **YAML configuration files** (``--config path.yaml``) to persist experiments; YAML merges with presets and can be partially specified.
- **Refactored CLI** with a clear precedence model:

  ``code defaults  <  preset (--preset)  <  YAML (--config)  <  explicit CLI flags  <  --set k=v``,

  where ``--set`` applies deep dot-path overrides (e.g., ``--set model.latent_dim=16``).

- **Best-parameter loading** via ``--load-best-params``

  - Loads prior best parameters per selected model from the previous run's output directory.
  - **Forces tuning OFF** (even if YAML/CLI/``--set`` attempts to re-enable tuning).

How to run PG-SUI
-----------------

- **Command line** — run ``pg-sui`` directly for scripted, reproducible workflows. This tutorial includes a copy/paste CLI quickstart, the precedence model, and best-parameter loading.
- **Python API** — instantiate an imputer with ``genotype_data`` and a typed config, then call ``fit()`` followed by ``transform()``.

Model Families
--------------

- **Deterministic (Baselines)**

  - ``ImputeMostFrequent``: per-locus mode imputation (global or population-aware). The population-aware variant uses ``popmap`` groups to compute modes per subpopulation.
  - ``ImputeRefAllele``: fills missing genotypes with the REF (0) state.

- **Unsupervised (Deep Learning)**

  - ``ImputeAutoencoder``: Standard autoencoder reconstruction (Hinton & Salakhutdinov, 2006).
  - ``ImputeVAE``: Variational Autoencoder with KL regularization (Kingma & Welling, 2013).
  - ``ImputeNLPCA``: Decoder-only non-linear PCA with direct latent optimization.
  - ``ImputeUBP``: Unsupervised Backpropagation with phased decoder-only training.

- **Supervised (Tree-based)**

  - ``ImputeRandomForest``: IterativeImputer + RandomForestClassifier.
  - ``ImputeHistGradientBoosting``: IterativeImputer + HistGradientBoostingClassifier.

.. warning::

    Supervised models can take significantly longer to run than unsupervised models due to the computationally expensive, iterative nature of the scikit-learn `IterativeImputer <https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.impute.IterativeImputer.html#sklearn.impute.IterativeImputer>`__. Per the scikit-learn documentation, "the computational cost of each iteration is :math:`O(k\,n\,p^3\min(n, p))`, where ``k=max_iter``, ``n`` is the number of samples, and ``p`` is the number of features. Setting ``n_nearest_features << n_features``, ``skip_complete=True`` or increasing ``tol`` can help to reduce its computational cost."

.. note::

   **Fit/ transform:** ``fit()`` and ``transform()`` do **not** accept genotype inputs. Each model is constructed with a `SNPio <https://snpio.readthedocs.io/en/latest/>`__ ``GenotypeData`` object and a typed ``*Config``. Then call ``fit()`` and ``transform()`` in sequence.

See :doc:`impute_nlpca`, :doc:`impute_ubp`, and :doc:`optuna_tuning` for model
details and tuning workflows.

Installation
------------

PG-SUI can be installed via pip, Anaconda, or Docker. See the instructions below and the :doc:`install` page for more details. Currently, PG-SUI requires Python 3.11 or 3.12, and depends on `SNPio <https://snpio.readthedocs.io/en/latest/>`__ for genotype I/O and preprocessing. Windows is not officially supported at this time, but should work within `WSL2 (Windows Subsystem for Linux 2) <https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/wsl/install>`__ or a compatible Docker environment.

Pip installation
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Install PG-SUI with pip (ideally in a fresh virtual environment):

.. code-block:: bash

    pip install pg-sui

Anaconda installation
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

An Anaconda package is also available on `Anaconda Cloud <https://anaconda.org/btmartin721/pg-sui>`__.

.. code-block:: bash

    conda create -n pgsui-env python=3.12
    conda activate pgsui-env
    conda install -c btmartin721 pg-sui

Docker installation
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Finally, a Docker image is available on `Docker Hub <https://hub.docker.com/r/btmartin721/pg-sui>`__:

.. code-block:: bash

    docker pull btmartin721/pg-sui:latest
    docker run -it --rm btmartin721/pg-sui:latest pg-sui --help

See :doc:`install` for more detail. PG-SUI expects genotype I/O via `SNPio <https://snpio.readthedocs.io/en/latest/>`__.

Data Input, Encodings, and Conventions
--------------------------------------

PG-SUI uses `SNPio's <https://snpio.readthedocs.io/en/latest/>`__  ``GenotypeData`` object.

- **Inputs**: VCF, PHYLIP, STRUCTURE, or GENEPOP, plus an optional ``popmap`` (population map) file. See `SNPio's documentation <https://snpio.readthedocs.io/en/latest/>`__ for details on supported formats and options.
- **Internal ML encoding**: diploids use a 3-class genotype representation (REF/HET/ALT), corresponding to integer codes 0/1/2. Haploids are treated as two classes by folding ALT into a binary code (0/1 for training, mapped back to 0/2 when decoded). Missing genotypes are encoded as ``-1`` during model fitting and imputation. REF alleles correspond to the most frequent homozygous genotype at each site (or consensus reference allele if reference genome-aligned VCF input is used). ALT corresponds to homozygous alternate genotypes; HET represents heterozygous genotypes.
- **Evaluation labels**: ``["REF", "HET", "ALT"]`` for diploids; haploids collapse to two classes (``["REF", "ALT"]``).
- **Output**: ``transform()`` returns a NumPy array of genotypes decoded from the REF/ HET/ ALT genotypes as IUPAC single-character strings ("A", "T", "G", "C", "R", "Y", "S", "W", "K", "M"). The imputed dataset is written to disk via SNPio in the same format as the input.

CLI Quickstart (copy/paste)
---------------------------

#. Prepare input files: a VCF (e.g., ``data.vcf.gz``) and optional population map (e.g., ``pops.popmap``).
#. Run a preset with two deep models (edit paths/ models as needed):

  .. code-block:: bash

      pg-sui \
        --input pgsui/example_data/vcf_files/phylogen_subset14K.vcf.gz \
        --popmap pgsui/example_data/popmaps/test.popmap \
        --models ImputeAutoencoder ImputeVAE \
        --preset balanced \
        --prefix demo \
        --sim-strategy random_weighted_inv \
        --sim-prop 0.30 \
        --tune \
        --tune-n-trials 100 \
        --n-jobs 4

#. Optional: add a YAML config (``--config vae_balanced.yaml``) or apply tweaks with ``--set key=value`` command-line flags.
#. Outputs and plots are written under ``<prefix>_output/``. The CLI prints paths as it runs.

.. note::

  The CLI supports ``--input`` as the primary input flag. ``--vcf`` is retained for backward compatibility but is deprecated in favor of ``--input``.

STRUCTURE inputs
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

STRUCTURE files include a few extra command-line flags compared to the other file formats and can be passed with ``--format structure`` (or inferred from the file extension). Optional flags mirror SNPio's ``StructureReader``:

- ``--structure-has-popids`` (second column contains population IDs)
- ``--structure-has-marker-names`` (first row contains marker names)
- ``--structure-allele-start-col <int>`` (zero-based allele start column)
- ``--structure-allele-encoding '{"1":"A","2":"C","3":"G","4":"T","-9":"N"}'``

Example:

.. code-block:: bash

    pg-sui \
      --input data.str \
      --format structure \
      --structure-has-popids \
      --structure-allele-start-col 2 \
      --structure-allele-encoding '{"1":"A","2":"C","3":"G","4":"T","-9":"N"}'


Loading best parameters from a previous run
-------------------------------------------

If you previously tuned (or otherwise produced a best-parameters file), you can load those parameters into the current run's configs using:

- ``--load-best-params`` (enables loading)
- optional ``--best-params-prefix <prior_prefix>`` (points at a previous run's ``<prior_prefix>_output`` directory)

When ``--load-best-params`` is enabled, PG-SUI **forces tuning OFF** for the affected models, regardless of YAML, CLI flags, ``--tune``, or ``--set tune.*``.

Best-parameter search locations
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

For each selected model, the CLI searches under the prior run's output directory and will accept either tuned or non-tuned best-parameters files:

- Tuned runs (`Optuna <https://optuna.org/>`__):

  - ``<prefix>_output/<Family>/optimize/<model>/parameters/best_tuned_parameters.json``

- Non-tuned / finalized best params:

  - ``<prefix>_output/<Family>/parameters/<model>/best_parameters.json``

where ``<Family>`` is typically ``Unsupervised`` or ``Deterministic`` and ``<model>`` may match either the canonical model name or its lower-case variant.

Example usage
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. code-block:: bash

    # Re-run with best parameters from an earlier tuning prefix,
    # with tuning forcibly disabled
    pg-sui \
      --input data.vcf.gz \
      --popmap pops.popmap \
      --models ImputeAutoencoder ImputeVAE \
      --prefix rerun_bestparams \
      --load-best-params \
      --best-params-prefix tuned_run_01 \
      --preset balanced \
      --sim-strategy random_weighted_inv \
      --sim-prop 0.30

.. note::

   If you supply ``--tune`` (or ``--set tune.enabled=True``) alongside ``--load-best-params``, PG-SUI will log warnings and proceed with tuning disabled. The best-params layer is intended to reproduce prior tuned settings without re-optimizing.

Simulated missingness and evaluation
------------------------------------

PG-SUI evaluates models by masking observed genotypes and scoring only
those held-out entries. See :doc:`simulate` for the full strategy
definitions, tree-based options, and evaluation workflow details.

Quick Start (End-to-End VAE Example)
------------------------------------

.. code-block:: python

    from snpio import VCFReader
    from pgsui import VAEConfig, ImputeVAE

    gd = VCFReader(
        filename="pgsui/example_data/vcf_files/phylogen_subset14K.vcf.gz",
        popmapfile="pgsui/example_data/popmaps/test.popmap",
        prefix="pgsui_demo",
        force_popmap=True,
        plot_format="pdf",
    )

    cfg = VAEConfig.from_preset("balanced")
    cfg.io.prefix = "pgsui_demo"
    cfg.model.latent_dim = 16
    cfg.tune.enabled = True
    cfg.tune.n_trials = 100
    cfg.tune.metrics = "pr_macro"
    cfg.plot.show = False

    model = ImputeVAE(genotype_data=gd, config=cfg)
    model.fit()
    X_imputed = model.transform()

Using Presets Programmatically
------------------------------

.. code-block:: python

    from pgsui import VAEConfig, ImputeVAE

    vae_cfg = VAEConfig.from_preset("fast")

    vae_cfg.model.num_hidden_layers = 3
    vae_cfg.io.prefix = "vae_run1"

    vae = ImputeVAE(genotype_data=gd, config=vae_cfg)
    vae.fit()
    X_vae = vae.transform()

YAML Configuration Files
------------------------

Example YAML - ``vae_balanced.yaml``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. code-block:: yaml

    io:
      prefix: "vae_demo"
      seed: 42

    model:
      latent_dim: 16
      num_hidden_layers: 3
      layer_scaling_factor: 4.0
      dropout_rate: 0.20
      activation: "relu"

    train:
      learning_rate: 0.0008
      early_stop_gen: 15
      min_epochs: 50
      max_epochs: 1000
      validation_split: 0.20
      device: "cpu"

    tune:
      enabled: true
      metric: "pr_macro"
      n_trials: 100
      patience: 10

    sim:
      simulate_missing: true
      sim_strategy: "random_weighted_inv"
      sim_prop: 0.30

    plot:
      fmt: "pdf"
      show: false
      dpi: 300

Loading YAML with Python
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. code-block:: python

    from pgsui import VAEConfig, ImputeVAE
    from pgsui.data_processing.config import load_yaml_to_dataclass

    cfg = load_yaml_to_dataclass("vae_balanced.yaml", VAEConfig)
    model = ImputeVAE(genotype_data=gd, config=cfg)
    model.fit()
    X_vae = model.transform()

Command-Line Interface (CLI)
----------------------------

Precedence model (highest last)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

``code defaults  <  preset (--preset)  <  YAML (--config)  <  explicit CLI flags  <  --set k=v``

- ``--preset`` selects a baseline preset.
- ``--config`` applies YAML on top of the preset.
- Explicit CLI flags (if provided) override YAML.
- ``--set`` applies deep dot-path overrides for final tweaks.

.. note::

   If ``--load-best-params`` is used, best-params are applied *before* CLI flags and ``--set``, but tuning is forced OFF at the end regardless of any later overrides.

Typical CLI usage
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. code-block:: bash

    # Minimal run with a preset
    pg-sui \
      --input data.vcf.gz \
      --popmap pops.popmap \
      --models ImputeAutoencoder ImputeVAE \
      --preset balanced \
      --prefix demo

    # YAML + quick overrides
    pg-sui \
      --input data.vcf.gz \
      --popmap pops.popmap \
      --models ImputeVAE \
      --preset thorough \
      --config vae_balanced.yaml \
      --set io.prefix=vae_vs_ae \
      --set model.latent_dim=32

Minimal API Reference
---------------------

.. code-block:: python

    model = SomeImputer(genotype_data=gd, config=SomeConfig.from_preset("balanced"))
    model.fit()
    X_imputed = model.transform()

References
----------

Chawla, N. V., Bowyer, K. W., Hall, L. O., & Kegelmeyer, W. P. (2002). SMOTE: Synthetic Minority Over-sampling Technique. *Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research*, 16, 321-357.

Hinton, G. E., & Salakhutdinov, R. (2006). Reducing the dimensionality of data with neural networks. *Science*, 313(5786), 504-507.

Kingma, D. P., & Welling, M. (2013). Auto-Encoding Variational Bayes. *arXiv preprint* arXiv:1312.6114.
